---
title: Lab 6 Dataset Analysis
tags: Lab-Notebook-Entry
article_header:
  type: cover
  image:
    src: /Bestsellers.jpeg
---

## **Analyzing the 20th-Century American Bestsellers Database**

### Link to [Dataset Documentation Google Sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1lXn90sRHnt38ZMJNI3nUtvTVAiE5Q4vNVWRxeB_5E_M/edit?usp=sharing)

### Link to the [Bestsellers Database website](http://bestsellers.lib.virginia.edu/) and [list of database entries](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1EkTyYB8rGt4FtZJM58duODuzJGVQ5eEqZpHigx6Z48E/edit?usp=sharing) copied into Google Sheet.

## Dataset Analysis

**What do you see as the most important or significant aspect of this dataset for scholars, researchers, and/or teachers?** As I mentioned in the dataset documentation sheet, I feel like this dataset is most valuable to teachers as a pedagogical “destination” where students can upload their original research and critical writing in a “real world” place where it is open, accessible, and visible. The availability of the dataset to anyone by virtue of it living online changes the stakes of writing a contribution to it; it is not an academic exercise that only the professor sees but instead a part of an accessible archive. This is one example where the dataset itself, by being largely qualitative, itself becomes a text that can be studied.

**What are the contributions this dataset makes to particular fields or disciplines?** The dataset contributes to studies of material culture and book histories as much as to the study of American literature. Because the fields in the “fully entry” dataset deal with publication history, book sales, advertisements, and reviews, it falls under the purview of American Studies as much as literary studies. The dataset might make more significant contributions to the field of higher education *pedagogy* that to the fields of American Studies and American literature themselves. It certainly serves as a reference point for scholars and students, such as myself, who want to learn about what titles were published and popular in a given period, but the way the research entries for each title are presented with incomplete and inconsistent citations of sources for the data shared, the database itself might not be a source a tenured professor would cite when writing a journal article. Then again, the site might point that professor-scholar in the director of an historical occurrence that they would verify elsewhere.

**What is its interdisciplinary value or importance?** While the dataset sits most squarely within literary and American studies, there is information from bestselling patterns that scholars in history, media studies, communications, and even politics might glean from the titles themselves. As Unsworth outlines in his syllabus, the release of a film adaptation of a book often makes that book a bestseller for a second time around, often a decade or more after its original publication. Similarly, it might be interesting to trace the sales of books about war during WWII or the Vietnam war. 

**What are the limits of this dataset? What is not included, and why, and what are the potential consequences of these omissions?** (From column I2 on General Info tab in Documentation sheet) 
Date when each student added their entry: because students created book entries from 1998 through at least 2016, as I read various entries I found myself wondering when it was created. Were it available, this information might tell us how student writing has changed over a nearly twenty year period, what kinds of details students choose to include in the more open ended writing assignment fields for each entry, and, perhaps most interestingly, the kinds of sources they are citing to gather bibliographic information about the author and publication history of each book. Some entries cite periodicals where books were reviewed or promoted and others cite websites dedicated to an author, either created by the author themselves, by their estate, or by an organization such as a “society.” 

A synopsis of the book itself, or a list of its themes/topics, apart from "reception history" and "critical analysis" essays: because many titles have fallen out of “fashion” and are not considered the stuff of the literary canon that is taught in public schools or deemed a reprintable classic by publishers, there are many titles which might benefit from a brief summary in addition to the granular details about publishing.

Entries for the 641 books that do not have full entries: Having these entries would make the dataset more complete, but the way the information is arranged with each entry housed on its own webpage, the architecture of the database would have to be adjusted for a researcher to be able to compare “publisher,” “sales figures,” or “translations” across entries. On the acknowledgments page Unsworth indicates that the database was created using MySQL, but the full repository of the data is not available for downloading. It seems like running a Python script to open all “view entry” links to then search a certain field or term across all the entry pages might be a way to work with the existing dataset as it appears in its online format (like we imagined Klein might have done to comb through the 90ish “Hemings” results in the Jefferson digital archive).
There are not consequences, per se, to the above three categories being omitted from the dataset, but their inclusion would make the data usable in different ways. An interesting project reading the existing data might be to look for any patterns in which of the 999 titles were given full entries. This seems to be determined by access to hard copies (possibly also influenced by professor suggestion and student choice). Do the 358 described books provide a canonical sample? A demographically skewed sample towards men over women? Towards British books over American writers? As seen from the “browse by decade view,” it is not always the higher ranked books that have full entries. 

**What would it take to remedy this situation: Is it possible to collect or include what has been overlooked? Why or why not?** 
To remedy the absence of a “year added” field would be difficult to do ex post facto, unless that information lives in the backend in the form of a timestamp and could be mapped to a field visible on the interface. It is certainly possible to add a summary of each book and to add the remaining 641 books. The initial scope of the project makes it such that students and professors can work on it for twenty years without completing it, essentially leaving room for ongoing if not perpetual additions and editions. In that way the projects reminds me of archival description; items and collections are never described just as they are never archived or preserved in the definitely past tense. The process to describe, archive, and preserve them remains ongoing as technology changes, values of society change (such as not using racist language in description or in preserving ephemera of nonwhite activist groups in addition to the papers of “great men”), and the questions we ask about the past change.

**How do the creators of this dataset describe or understand its limitations or boundaries?**
The Acknowledgments page focuses mostly on the digital infrastructure and crediting those at U of V and Brandeis who helped build and maintain the project. Beyond that page there is no description of the dataset other than what can be gleaned about the students’ research process and protocol from the syllabus, and so there is no explicit statement of any limits. Again, Professor Unsworth and his collaborators view the digital infrastructure as a pedagogical space rather than the dataset as authoritative source. Because its goal is not to be exhaustive to make claims of completeness, I think there is less need to name limits and more of an opportunity to invite other instructors and institutions to collaborate in the database’s future contributions and maintenance.

**Scholarly Connections:**
Matthew G. Kirschenbaum’s *Bitstreams: The Future of Digital Literary Heritage* asserts that “Manuscript archives have been receiving born-digital materials for more than two decades now, an inevitable outgrowth of the widespread shift to word processors and personal computers that swept the global north in the 1980s” (21). His description of Toni Morrison’s “archives without dust” makes me curious about the “manuscript holdings” field of bestsellers from the 1980s and 1990s. The manuscripts for books by 1990s authors Danielle Steele and Nicholas Sparks, for example, remain with the authors, who are living. But one wonders what form they might be in. A CD-rom? A flash drive? Have those authors thought of how they might want to leave their manuscripts to an institution?
Looking at a selection of entries for books published in the late 80s and into the 90s, none of the “manuscript holdings” fields mentioned any bitstream-containing hardware. Several students noted that a writer’s “papers” were held at an institutional archive and to verify whether or not the manuscript of that particular work were included in that collection would require traveling to the archive in person, the process Kirschenbaum describes of visiting the Firestone Library and accessing the “digital surrogates” of Morrison’s “papers.” Kirschenbaum describes how the “challenges archivists now face when confronted with the digital legacies of writers or other public figures are, of course, just a reflection of a much broader set of changes in relation to how contributions to the public sphere become part of the collective memory amid the always-on torrent of the bitstream.” This “always-on torrent” of the public sphere is evident in student citations of people.com, publishersweekly.com, and even amazon.com as a source of book reviews and information about book sales.

The books themselves might be printed as hard copies, but the conversations *about* books have largely moved out of the pages of print periodicals and moved online, just as this database has (compared to Lillian Taylor’s library of physical copies of bestsellers). Without capitulating to hypothetical despair over “digital dark ages,” it is sad to think that the crashing of a server or the eventual bit rot of stored data might erode those conversations in ways more final than fire or flood.


